Blog post: Agentgateway and vLLM Semantic Router Integration 101 (#779)
agentgateway/website: content/blog/2026-07-28-agentgateway-semantic-router-integration.md

---
title: "Semantic Routing, Assembled: agentgateway and vLLM Semantic Router in Practice"
category: "Deep Dive"
toc: false

> publishDate: 2026-07-28

Reviewer: Let's be mindful of the date this gets merged so`publishDate` is correct.

Author: If we merge (and publish) on Tuesday (so the 28th), that works for me.

author: "Duncan Doyle"
description: "The previous post showed the cost savings semantic routing can deliver. This post shows how the pieces actually connect: what vLLM Semantic Router is, how agentgateway calls it as an ExtProc, and how to stand up a single-provider routing setup yourself."
---

> In our previous post on semantic routing with Agentgateway and vLLM Semantic Router we focussed on the benefits model selection can bring to agentic systems in terms of costs. We demonstrated that by analysing and classifying each prompt, we can send routine work to cheap models, while keeping the frontier models doing the hard stuff. As a result, workloads can be processed ~40% cheaper, without the model consumer ever having to explicitly pick a model. In that post, we treated the router as a black box: agentgateway sends the received prompt to the router, the router picks a model, agentgateway routes the request to the selected model, processes the response and records the conversation's metrics.

Reviewer: "our previous post" or "previous post" should be a link to https://agentgateway.dev/blog/2026-07-17-semantic-routing-llm-costs/

This post opens the box. Before we extend the idea of semantic routing to concepts like cross-provider model selection and routing, we need to have a better understanding of the underlying machinery: how agentgateway integrates with vLLM Semantic Router (vSR), how vSR selects the model to route, how that information is communicated back to agentgateway and finally how agentgateway uses this information to route the request to the correct LLM provider (e.g. OpenAI, Anthropic, Gemini) and model.

> This blog uses agentgateway and the [`llm-semantic-routing` example](https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/tree/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing), the same configuration the cost demo layers its measurement harness on top of, a solid starting point for building your own solution. The agentgateway docs give a concise [vLLM Semantic Router integration overview](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/latest/integrations/vllm-semantic-router/). This post is the hands-on companion to it.

Reviewer: Consider rewording/simplifying. Something like "This blog uses agentgateway and the example from the previous blog post..."

## vSR classifies, it does not proxy

The first thing to understand is what vLLM Semantic Router is *not*. It is not a model. It is not a proxy that sits in your data path forwarding tokens. vSR is a **classifier that emits a routing decision**. When agentgateway (or any other system for that matter) hands it a prompt, it extracts various signals from that prompt, e.g. keywords, complexity score, context length. It combines these signals into a score using a concept called _projection_, which maps the score onto a band (a named range of that score such as "low-cost" or "expensive"). Finally, the decision layer applies boolean rules over signals and bands, resolving to a model via the configured selection strategy (priority, confidence, or tier).

> agentgateway owns and controls the data path. It receives the client request, applies routing logic and policies (e.g. authentication, authorization, rate limiting) if configured and applicable, calls the model provider, streams the reponse, and, optionally, prices the request against its model-cost catalog and emits telemetry. The router decides, while the gateway enforces and observes.

Reviewer: `reponse` is a typo.

IMO "It receives the client request, applies routing logic and policies (e.g. authentication, authorization, rate limiting) if configured and applicable, calls the model provider, streams the reponse, and, optionally, prices the request against its model-cost catalog and emits telemetry. " is a mouthful. Consider simplifying the message or breaking the content into multiple sentences.

## ExtProc: the gateway-to-router handshake

> So how does a request on the gateway get a decision from the router mid-flight? Through [**external processing (ExtProc)**](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/latest/traffic-management/extproc/#about-external-processing): agentgateway streams a request's headers and body, as well as its response headers and body if enabled, to an external gRPC service mid-flight. It holds the request until that service answers. The service isn't just *consulted*. It receives the real headers and body and can **mutate** them, rewrite headers, replace the request body, or short-circuit the call entirely. agentgateway applies those changes before further processing the request or response.

Reviewer: `**external processing (ExtProc)**` IMO this does not need to be in bold font.

vSR's *routing decision* happens on the request side of that hook. It receives the prompt in the request body, classifies it, and enriches the request with its decision. It rewrites the `model` field in the body to the model it chose and adds an `x-vsr-selected-model` header (plus diagnostic `x-vsr-*` headers) to the request. agentgateway then forwards the request to the provider with that selected model. vSR speaks this ExtProc protocol on port `50051`, wired up with a single [`AgentgatewayPolicy`](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/latest/reference/api-kubespec/policies/).

Here is the actual request lifecycle for the single-provider setup:

{{< reuse-image src="img/blog/agentgateway-vsr-integration/agw-vsr-request-flow.png" >}}

*(The response also passes back through vSR — for caching, safety, and usage accounting. It is omitted here to keep the routing path clear.)*

> The client sends `model: "auto"`. vSR classifies, rewrites `model` in the request body to the model it chose, and adds an `x-vsr-selected-model` header to the request. agentgateway then forwards the request to OpenAI with the chosen model. The client never picked a model, and the gateway never had to understand the prompt.

Reviewer: It seems like this is missing the step of how agtw sends the req to vSR.

## A 101 deployment

> The example consists of three agentgateway objects plus a [vSR Helm release](https://vllm-sr.ai/docs/installation/k8s/agentgateway/), which deploys the vSR ExtProc server. It assumes you already have a working agentgateway LLM path, a proxy, an `openai-secret`, and optionally, a [model-cost catalog](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/llm/cost-controls/costs/), and an [OpenTelemetry stack](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/observability/otel-stack/) (all covered in the [agentgateway docs](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/llm/providers/openai/)). With that in place, the routing is small. For a complete, runnable end-to-end setup, see the upstream [`llm-semantic-routing` example](https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/tree/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing).

Reviewer: "The example" should link to https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/tree/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing

Reviewer: s/the vSR ExtProc server/vSR/

Reviewer: Consider rewording "It assumes you already have a working agentgateway LLM path, a proxy, an openai-secret, and optionally, a [model-cost catalog](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/llm/cost-controls/costs/), and an [OpenTelemetry stack](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/observability/otel-stack/) (all covered in the [agentgateway docs](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/llm/providers/openai/)).". A reader new to agtw may be confused by "working agentgateway LLM path, a proxy", so we should keep it higher level like "agentgateway deployed" or the "agentgateway control plane and agentgateway-managed proxy...".

### The backend: an OpenAI provider with no model

```yaml
apiVersion: agentgateway.dev/v1alpha1
kind: AgentgatewayBackend
metadata:
  name: openai-router-selected
  namespace: agentgateway-system
spec:
  ai:
    provider:
      # No model is pinned here on purpose. vSR selects it per request;
      # agentgateway forwards whatever model ended up in the request body.
      openai: {}
  policies:
    auth:
      secretRef:
        name: openai-secret
```

The important detail is the empty `openai: {}`, i.e. no model. In a normal LLM backend you'd name the model. Here the model is a *runtime decision*, so the backend deliberately leaves it open.

### The route: match the LLM paths

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: openai-semantic-routing
  namespace: agentgateway-system
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - { group: gateway.networking.k8s.io, kind: Gateway, name: agentgateway-proxy, namespace: agentgateway-system }
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path: { type: PathPrefix, value: /v1/chat/completions }
    - path: { type: PathPrefix, value: /v1/responses }
    backendRefs:

>     - { group: agentgateway.dev, kind: AgentgatewayBackend, name: openai-router-selected, namespace: agentgateway-system }

Reviewer: Consider updating the formatting to be the same as https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/blob/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing/k8s/agentgateway-routing.yaml

```

A plain `HTTPRoute`: OpenAI-compatible chat and responses paths, one backend. Nothing about it knows a router exists. 

{{< callout type="info" >}}
If you want to route to different `AgentgatewayBackends`, e.g. because you want to route requests across LLM providers, this `HTTPRoute` would contain multiple rules, at least one per LLM provider. We'll cover dynamic cross-provider LLM routing in a follow-up blog post.
{{< /callout >}}

### The policy: attach vSR as an ExtProc

```yaml
apiVersion: agentgateway.dev/v1alpha1
kind: AgentgatewayPolicy
metadata:
  name: semantic-router-extproc
  namespace: agentgateway-system
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute            # attached to the route above
    name: openai-semantic-routing
  traffic:
    extProc:
      backendRef:
        name: semantic-router  # vSR's gRPC service
        namespace: agentgateway-system
        port: 50051
      processingOptions:
        requestHeaderMode: Send
        requestBodyMode: FullDuplexStreamed   # vSR needs the prompt body to classify
        responseHeaderMode: Send
        responseBodyMode: Buffered
        allowModeOverride: true
```

> This is the whole integration. The policy targets the `HTTPRoute` and points at vSR's ExtProc server. Note what is *absent*: there is no `traffic.phase` configuration defined in the `AgentgatewayPolicy`, so the policy is applied in the default **PostRouting** phase. This means that vSR runs *after* agentgateway has already selected the backend. For a single provider that is completely fine, there is only one backend, so the LLM provider routing decision is never in question. The only thing vSR changes is the `model` field inside the request body. Hold that thought, as it is the exact hinge the next blog post, which discusses cross LLM provider model routing, turns on.

Reviewer: > "This is the whole integration"

From an agtw standpoint, but vSR needs similar, e.g. stream or buffer-based processing: https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/blob/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing/k8s/semantic-router-values.yaml#L347-L362

Reviewer: Consider pointing the reader to https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/about/policies/ to learn more about agtw policies.

### Configuring vSR: signals → score → decision

> vSR's behaviour lives in its Helm values (`semantic-router-values.yaml`). It reads like a small rules engine, and it's worth understanding as a pipeline, because vSR traces its own work with a span per stage (`semantic_router.signal.*` for signal evaluation, `semantic_router.decision.evaluation` for the decision, and `semantic_router.plugin.execution` for the plugin chain). A trace reads back as that same pipeline.

Reviewer: Consider linking to https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/blob/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing/k8s/semantic-router-values.yaml

```

**4. Decisions: a lane becomes a model.** Finally, each lane maps to a concrete model, by priority:

```yaml
routing:
  decisions:
  - name: route_to_expensive   # priority 200
    rules: { conditions: [{ type: projection, name: expensive_lane }] }
    modelRefs: [{ model: gpt-5.5 }]
  - name: route_to_low_cost    # priority 100 (default)
    rules: { conditions: [{ type: projection, name: low_cost_lane }] }
    modelRefs: [{ model: gpt-5.4-nano }]
```

That is the reasoning the router does on every request: extract signals, score, band, decide. Here each lane maps to a single fixed model. Remember that too! In our cross-provider follow-up blog post we will replace the "one model per lane" concept with "a set of candidate models per lane, cheapest capable one wins."

## Watch it work

With `model: "auto"` and the debug header, the selected model shows up in the response headers:

```bash
curl -sS -i "$GW/v1/chat/completions" -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'X-VSR-Debug: true' \
  -d '{"model":"auto","messages":[{"role":"user","content":"Implement a small Go helper and one table-driven test."}],"max_tokens":64}'
# ...
# x-vsr-selected-model: gpt-5.4-nano
```

> Swap the prompt for a distributed-systems design question and the same request comes back `x-vsr-selected-model: gpt-5.5`. Two prompts, one endpoint. There was no model named by the client, and the decision was made entirely from the prompt's content.

Reviewer: s/Swap the prompt for a distributed-systems design question/Swap the prompt for a complex coding question/

---
title: "Semantic Routing, Assembled: agentgateway and vLLM Semantic Router in Practice"
category: "Deep Dive"
toc: false
publishDate: 2026-07-28
author: "Duncan Doyle"
description: "The previous post showed the cost savings semantic routing can deliver. This post shows how the pieces actually connect: what vLLM Semantic Router is, how agentgateway calls it as an ExtProc, and how to stand up a single-provider routing setup yourself."
---

> In our [previous post](https://agentgateway.dev/blog/2026-07-17-semantic-routing-llm-costs/) on semantic routing with Agentgateway and vLLM Semantic Router we focussed on the benefits model selection can bring to agentic systems in terms of costs. We demonstrated that by analysing and classifying each prompt, we can send routine work to cheap models, while keeping the frontier models doing the hard stuff. As a result, workloads can be processed ~40% cheaper, without the model consumer ever having to explicitly pick a model. In that post, we treated the router as a black box: agentgateway sends the received prompt to the router, the router picks a model, agentgateway routes the request to the selected model, processes the response and records the conversation's metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our [previous post](https://agentgateway.dev/blog/2026-07-17-semantic-routing-llm-costs/) on semantic routing with agentgateway and vLLM Semantic Router we focussed on the benefits model selection can bring to agentic systems in terms of costs. We demonstrated that by analyzing and classifying each prompt, we can send routine work to cheap models, while keeping the frontier models doing the hard stuff. As a result, workloads can be processed ~40% cheaper, without the model consumer ever having to explicitly pick a model. In that post, we treated the router as a black box: agentgateway sends the received prompt to the router, the router picks a model, agentgateway routes the request to the selected model, processes the response, and records the conversation's metrics.
```

> This post opens the box. Before we extend the idea of semantic routing to concepts like cross-provider model selection and routing, we need to have a better understanding of the underlying machinery: how agentgateway integrates with vLLM Semantic Router (vSR), how vSR selects the model to route, how that information is communicated back to agentgateway and finally how agentgateway uses this information to route the request to the correct LLM provider (e.g. OpenAI, Anthropic, Gemini) and model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This post opens the box. Before we extend the idea of semantic routing to concepts like cross-provider model selection and routing, we need to have a better understanding of the underlying machinery: how agentgateway integrates with vLLM Semantic Router (vSR), how vSR selects the model to route, how that information is communicated back to agentgateway, and finally how agentgateway uses this information to route the request to the correct LLM provider (such as OpenAI, Anthropic, and Gemini) and model (such as gpt-5.5, claude-haiku-4-5, and gemini-3.5-flash).
```

This blog uses agentgateway and the [`llm-semantic-routing` example](https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/tree/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing), a solid starting point for building your own solution. The agentgateway docs give a concise [vLLM Semantic Router integration overview](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/latest/integrations/vllm-semantic-router/). This post is the hands-on companion to it.

## vSR classifies, it does not proxy

> The first thing to understand is what vLLM Semantic Router is *not*. It is not a model. It is not a proxy that sits in your data path forwarding tokens. vSR is a **classifier that emits a routing decision**. When agentgateway (or any other system for that matter) hands it a prompt, it extracts various signals from that prompt, e.g. keywords, complexity score, context length. It combines these signals into a score using a concept called _projection_, which maps the score onto a band (a named range of that score such as "low-cost" or "expensive"). Finally, the decision layer applies boolean rules over signals and bands, resolving to a model via the configured selection strategy (priority, confidence, or tier).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first thing to understand is what vLLM Semantic Router is *not*. It is not a model. It is not a proxy that sits in your data path forwarding tokens. vSR is a **classifier that emits a routing decision**. When agentgateway (or any other system for that matter) hands it a prompt, it extracts various signals from that prompt, such as keywords, complexity score, and context length. It combines these signals into a score using a concept called _projection_, which maps the score onto a band (a named range of that score such as "low-cost" or "expensive"). Finally, the decision layer applies boolean rules over signals and bands, resolving to a model via the configured selection strategy (priority, confidence, or tier).
```

> agentgateway owns and controls the data path. It receives the client request and applies routing logic and policies (e.g. authentication, authorization, rate limiting) if configured and applicable. Next, it calls the model provider, streams the response, and, optionally, prices the request against its model-cost catalog and emits telemetry. The router decides, while the gateway enforces and observes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Agentgateway owns and controls the data path. It receives the client request and applies routing logic and policies like authentication, authorization, or rate limiting if configured and applicable. Next, it calls the model provider, streams the response, and, optionally, prices the request against its model-cost catalog and emits telemetry. The router decides, while the gateway enforces and observes.
```

## ExtProc: the gateway-to-router handshake

> So how does a request on the gateway get a decision from the router mid-flight? Through [external processing (ExtProc)](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/latest/traffic-management/extproc/#about-external-processing): agentgateway streams a request's headers and body, as well as its response headers and body if enabled, to an external gRPC service mid-flight. It holds the request until that service answers. The service isn't just *consulted*. It receives the real headers and body and can **mutate** them, rewrite headers, replace the request body, or short-circuit the call entirely. agentgateway applies those changes before further processing the request or response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So how does a request on the gateway get a decision from the router mid-flight? Through [external processing (ExtProc)](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/latest/traffic-management/extproc/#about-external-processing): agentgateway streams a request's headers and body, as well as its response headers and body if enabled, to an external gRPC service mid-flight. It holds the request until that service answers. The service isn't just *consulted*. It receives the real headers and body and can **mutate** them, rewrite headers, replace the request body, or short-circuit the call entirely. Agentgateway applies those changes before further processing the request or response.
```

> vSR's *routing decision* happens on the request side of that hook. It receives the prompt in the request body, classifies it, and enriches the request with its decision. It rewrites the `model` field in the body to the model it chose and adds an `x-vsr-selected-model` header (plus diagnostic `x-vsr-*` headers) to the request. agentgateway then forwards the request to the provider with that selected model. vSR speaks this ExtProc protocol on port `50051`, wired up with a single [`AgentgatewayPolicy`](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/latest/reference/api-kubespec/policies/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
vSR's *routing decision* happens on the request side of that hook. It receives the prompt in the request body, classifies it, and enriches the request with its decision. It rewrites the `model` field in the body to the model it chose and adds an `x-vsr-selected-model` header (plus diagnostic `x-vsr-*` headers) to the request. Agentgateway then forwards the request to the provider with that selected model. vSR speaks this ExtProc protocol on port `50051`, wired up with a single [`AgentgatewayPolicy`](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/latest/reference/api-kubespec/policies/).
```

Here is the actual request lifecycle for the single-provider setup:

{{< reuse-image src="img/blog/agentgateway-vsr-integration/agw-vsr-request-flow.png" >}}

*(The response also passes back through vSR — for caching, safety, and usage accounting. It is omitted here to keep the routing path clear.)*

> The client sends `model: "auto"`. agentgateway sends the request to vSR via ExtProc. vSR classifies, rewrites `model` in the request body to the model it chose, and adds an `x-vsr-selected-model` header to the request. agentgateway then forwards the request to OpenAI with the chosen model. The client never picked a model, and the gateway never had to understand the prompt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client sends `model: "auto"`. Agentgateway sends the request to vSR via ExtProc. vSR classifies, rewrites `model` in the request body to the model it chose, and adds an `x-vsr-selected-model` header to the request. Agentgateway then forwards the request to the LLM provider, OpenAI, with the chosen model. The client never picked a model, and the gateway never had to understand the prompt.
```

### The backend: an OpenAI provider with no model

```yaml
apiVersion: agentgateway.dev/v1alpha1
kind: AgentgatewayBackend
metadata:
  name: openai-router-selected
  namespace: agentgateway-system
spec:
  ai:
    provider:
      # No model is pinned here on purpose. vSR selects it per request;
      # agentgateway forwards whatever model ended up in the request body.
      openai: {}
  policies:
    auth:
      secretRef:
        name: openai-secret
```

> The important detail is the empty `openai: {}`, i.e. no model. In a normal LLM backend you'd name the model. Here the model is a *runtime decision*, so the backend deliberately leaves it open.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The important detail is the empty `openai: {}`, which means that no specific model is set. In a normal LLM backend, you'd name the model. Here the model is a *runtime decision*, so the backend deliberately leaves it empty.
```

### The route: match the LLM paths

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: openai-semantic-routing
  namespace: agentgateway-system
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - { group: gateway.networking.k8s.io, kind: Gateway, name: agentgateway-proxy, namespace: agentgateway-system }
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /v1/chat/completions
    - path: 
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /v1/responses
    backendRefs:
    - group: agentgateway.dev
      kind: AgentgatewayBackend
      name: openai-router-selected
      namespace: agentgateway-system
```

A plain `HTTPRoute`: OpenAI-compatible chat and responses paths, one backend. Nothing about it knows a router exists. 

{{< callout type="info" >}}

> If you want to route to different `AgentgatewayBackends`, e.g. because you want to route requests across LLM providers, this `HTTPRoute` would contain multiple rules, at least one per LLM provider. We'll cover dynamic cross-provider LLM routing in a follow-up blog post.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to route to different `AgentgatewayBackends`, such as to route requests across LLM providers, add multiple rules to the `HTTPRoute`, with at least one rule per LLM provider. We'll cover dynamic cross-provider LLM routing in a follow-up blog post.
```

{{< /callout >}}

### The policy: attach vSR as an ExtProc

```yaml
apiVersion: agentgateway.dev/v1alpha1
kind: AgentgatewayPolicy
metadata:
  name: semantic-router-extproc
  namespace: agentgateway-system
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute            # attached to the route above
    name: openai-semantic-routing
  traffic:
    extProc:
      backendRef:
        name: semantic-router  # vSR's gRPC service
        namespace: agentgateway-system
        port: 50051
      processingOptions:
        requestHeaderMode: Send
        requestBodyMode: FullDuplexStreamed   # vSR needs the prompt body to classify
        responseHeaderMode: Send
        responseBodyMode: Buffered
        allowModeOverride: true
```

> This is the whole integration configuration in agentgateway (Note that vSR also needs to be correctly configured for ExtProc communication, as shown [here](https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/blob/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing/k8s/semantic-router-values.yaml#L347-L362). For this demo, we assume vSR has already been setup with this configuration). The policy targets the `HTTPRoute` and points at vSR's ExtProc server. Note what is *absent*: there is no `traffic.phase` configuration defined in the [`AgentgatewayPolicy`](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/about/policies/), so the policy is applied in the default **PostRouting** phase. This means that vSR runs *after* agentgateway has already selected the backend. For a single provider that is completely fine, there is only one backend, so the LLM provider routing decision is never in question. The only thing vSR changes is the `model` field inside the request body. Hold that thought, as it is the exact hinge the next blog post, which discusses cross LLM provider model routing, turns on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example shows the whole integration configuration in agentgateway. (Note that vSR also needs to be correctly configured for ExtProc communication, as shown [in the code repo's example](https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/blob/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing/k8s/semantic-router-values.yaml#L347-L362). For this demo, we assume vSR has already been setup with this configuration). 

The [AgentgatewayPolicy](https://agentgateway.dev/docs/kubernetes/main/about/policies/), targets the HTTPRoute and points at vSR's ExtProc server. Note what is *absent*: there is no `traffic.phase` configuration defined in the policy so the policy is applied in the default **PostRouting** phase. This means that vSR runs *after* agentgateway has already selected the backend. For a single provider that is completely fine because there is only one backend, so the LLM provider routing decision is never in question. The only thing vSR changes is the `model` field inside the request body. Hold that thought, as it is the exact hinge that the next blog post, which discusses cross LLM provider model routing, turns on.
```

### Configuring vSR: signals → score → decision

> vSR's behaviour lives in its Helm values ([`semantic-router-values.yaml`](https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/blob/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing/k8s/semantic-router-values.yaml)). It reads like a small rules engine, and it's worth understanding as a pipeline, because vSR traces its own work with a span per stage (`semantic_router.signal.*` for signal evaluation, `semantic_router.decision.evaluation` for the decision, and `semantic_router.plugin.execution` for the plugin chain). A trace reads back as that same pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
vSR's behavior lives in its Helm values ([`semantic-router-values.yaml`](https://github.com/agentgateway/agentgateway/blob/main/examples/llm-semantic-routing/k8s/semantic-router-values.yaml)). It reads like a small rules engine, and it's worth understanding as a pipeline, because vSR traces its own work with a span per stage (`semantic_router.signal.*` for signal evaluation, `semantic_router.decision.evaluation` for the decision, and `semantic_router.plugin.execution` for the plugin chain). A trace reads back as that same pipeline.
```

```yaml
routing:
  projections:
    scores:
    - name: advanced_need_score
      method: weighted_sum
      inputs:
      - { type: keyword,    name: advanced_markers,          weight: 0.45 }
      - { type: embedding,  name: advanced_reasoning_intent, weight: 0.35 }
      - { type: complexity, name: needs_advanced_reasoning:hard, weight: 0.35 }
      - { type: keyword,    name: routine_coding_markers,    weight: -0.10 }  # pushes back toward cheap
    mappings:
    - name: advanced_need_band
      source: advanced_need_score
      outputs:
      - { name: low_cost_lane,  lt:  0.35 }
      - { name: expensive_lane, gte: 0.35 }
```

**4. Decisions: a lane becomes a model.** Finally, each lane maps to a concrete model, by priority:

```yaml
routing:
  decisions:
  - name: route_to_expensive   # priority 200
    rules: { conditions: [{ type: projection, name: expensive_lane }] }
    modelRefs: [{ model: gpt-5.5 }]
  - name: route_to_low_cost    # priority 100 (default)
    rules: { conditions: [{ type: projection, name: low_cost_lane }] }
    modelRefs: [{ model: gpt-5.4-nano }]
```

> That is the reasoning the router does on every request: extract signals, score, band, decide. Here each lane maps to a single fixed model. Remember that too! In our cross-provider follow-up blog post we will replace the "one model per lane" concept with "a set of candidate models per lane, cheapest capable one wins."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is the reasoning the router does on every request: extract signals, score, band, decide. Here each lane maps to a single fixed model. Remember that, too! In our cross-provider follow-up blog post, we will replace the "one model per lane" concept with "a set of candidate models per lane, cheapest capable one wins."
```

## Watch it work

With `model: "auto"` and the debug header, the selected model shows up in the response headers:

```bash
curl -sS -i "$GW/v1/chat/completions" -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'X-VSR-Debug: true' \
  -d '{"model":"auto","messages":[{"role":"user","content":"Implement a small Go helper and one table-driven test."}],"max_tokens":64}'
# ...
# x-vsr-selected-model: gpt-5.4-nano
```

Swap the prompt for a complex coding question and the same request comes back `x-vsr-selected-model: gpt-5.5`. Two prompts, one endpoint. There was no model named by the client, and the decision was made entirely from the prompt's content.

> Because agentgateway owns the data path, an OpenTelemetry stack shows the concept end to end. agentgateway traces the request and the LLM call, priced against its model-cost catalog, and vSR emits its own spans for signal evaluation, the decision, and the plugin chain. When trace context is propagated across the ExtProc hop, those vSR spans join agentgateway's trace, so a single trace reads as the request walking through the whole pipeline described above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because agentgateway owns the data path, an OpenTelemetry stack shows the concept end to end. Agentgateway traces the request and the LLM call, which is priced against the model cost catalog. vSR emits its own spans for signal evaluation, the decision, and the plugin chain. When trace context is propagated across the ExtProc hop, those vSR spans join agentgateway's trace, so a single trace reads as the request walking through the whole pipeline as previously described.
```
